.. include:: /substitutions.rst

.. _log_files:

=========
Log files
=========

ViPErLEED produces multiple log files with names like
``<section>-<timestamp>.log`` that contain various
information about the ViPErLEED run. ``<section>``
corresponds to the part of ViPErLEED that produced the
log files, while ``<timestamp>`` marks the time when
the file was *first created* (in the format ``yyMMdd-hhmmss``).

.. _log_files_calc:

``viperleed-calc-<timestamp>.log``
==================================

This is the main log file for |calc| and contains the most important
information for the run, including all raised warnings, error messages
and – if enabled – debug information. The verbosity of the log file can
be controlled with the parameter :ref:`LOG_LEVEL`.
The contents of this file will also be printed to the standard output.
*If something goes wrong in a ViPErLEED run, this is the first place to look.*

.. _log_files_refcalc:

``refcalc-<timestamp>.log``
===========================

The refcalc log contains the output normally created by the TensErLEED
:ref:`reference calculation<ref-calc>`, including information on the
convergence of the layer doubling scheme of TensErLEED
:cite:p:`blumFastLEEDIntensity2001a`. Logs from multiple reference
calculations will be collected and their order may not be preserved.

``delta-<timestamp>.log``
=========================

The log of the :ref:`delta-amplitude calculation<sec_deltas>`.
It generally does not contain much useful information, except the
``LMAX`` value used for each energy step. Logs from multiple delta
calculations will be collected and their order may not be preserved.

``search-<timestamp>.log``
==========================

The log file for the :ref:`structure search<sec_search>`.
It again contains mostly the output generated by the TensErLEED structure
search and primarily information relating to the setup, e.g., the names of
the used delta files and the exact starting configurations for each individual.

compile-logs
============

As part of the normal execution, |calc| compiles several :term:`Fortran` source
files at runtime.
Any messages and warnings produced by the employed compiler are stored, sorted
by section and colleted in the ``compile-logs`` directory under ``SUPP``.
These files can be useful for troubleshooting and debugging any issues with the
compilation process.
