.. include:: /substitutions.rst

.. _beam_alignment:

=======================
Electron beam alignment
=======================

The incidence angle of the electron beam on the sample has a significant impact
on the outcome of a |LEED-IV| measurement. Even a small angular error can lead
to substantially worse R-factors. To ensure that symmetry-equivalent
diffraction spots are indeed equivalent, the beam must be perpendicular to the
sample surface. It is therefore worth spending considerable time ensuring that
the sample is properly aligned. The following procedure must be performed
whenever anything about the shielding, the electron gun, or the compensation
coil setup changes.

Initial alignment and compensation coil calibration
===================================================

For this setup you will need a sample plate with a shield mounted in front of
it. The shield must have a small hole (≈1 mm) at the center, at the position
where the sample would normally be mounted. You must be able to ground the
shield while still being able to measure the sample (target) current. Any other
setup that accomplishes the same goal (e.g., a sample plate with a hole and a
filament underneath acting as a target) may also be used, as long as the target
current can be reliably measured. If you are not using the ViPErLEED hardware
controller, apply a positive bias to the target to prevent secondary electron
emission from interfering with the alignment process. Finally, you will need
at least two compensation coils mounted on the chamber to compensate for
external magnetic fields.

Begin by placing the target under the electron gun so that it is visually
aligned. Ensure that compensation (Helmholtz) coils are active or magnetic
shielding is installed to reduce the influence of Earth's magnetic field. If
you have only two compensation coils and they are not yet calibrated to
compensate for Earth's magnetic field, leave them unpowered. Try to tilt the
sample plate such that the electron beam is perpendicular to it.

Turn on your LEED optics and increase the beam energy to at least 1000 eV.
While measuring the target current, move the sample plate in the plane
perpendicular to the beam direction and look for the current maximum. Once you
have narrowed down the position of the maximum, adjust the tilt and search for
the angle that produces the largest target current. After determining the
angle, repeat the process and determine position and angle again. If these
values no longer change, decrease the beam energy to a lower value such as 30
eV.

With the low energy set, turn on the two compensation coils. Adjust the coil
currents until the target current reaches a maximum again. At this point, the
magnetic field generated by the coils should compensate the influence of
external magnetic fields inside the chamber. After locating the maximum,
increase the beam energy back to 1000 eV.

Now repeat the position and angle calibration at high beam energy, this time
with the compensation coils active. The position and angle should not change
much, as magnetic fields are less impactful at higher electron energies.
Afterwards, repeat the compensation coil calibration at low beam energies.
Continue alternating between these two calibrations until the changes become
negligible. Note down the final position, angle, and coil currents. Use these
values for all future |LEED-IV| measurements unless the setup changes. If the
compensation coils are moved, the entire calibration must be repeated.

Sample alignment
================

The following alignment procedure should be performed whenever a new sample
plate is inserted into the manipulator. Even a slight twist can lead to an
error of single-digit degrees, which is fatal for |LEED-IV| measurements.

Apply the values determined during the initial calibration, now with the
sample that you plan to measure mounted in the sample holder. Turn on the LEED
optics and slowly increase the beam energy until the first diffraction spots
appear. As the energy increases, the diffraction spots should converge toward
the point directly beneath the electron gun. If they do not, then the sample
is not perpendicular to the electron beam. Adjust the angle until all spots
converge toward the shadow of the electron gun (the middle of the LEED
screen).

Once the optimal angle has been found, reduce the beam energy again. Slowly
increase it until you see two diffraction spots that are clearly
symmetry-equivalent. Find an energy where these spots vanish into the
background and sweep the energy back and forth around this value. Symmetry-
equivalent spots must disappear at exactly the same energy. If they do not,
slightly adjust the sample angle until they coincide. At this stage, only very
small angle adjustments (fractions of a degree) should be necessary. After the
two spots vanish simultaneously, select a different pair of symmetry-equivalent
spots and repeat the process.
